Once around
Swashman Wackman 3.
So this is the third in my series of
looking at the comets that were found by
Swashman and Wackman. And SW3 or comet
73P
as it was given the designation of was
discovered by Swashman and Wackman in
1930 at the Hamburg Observatory while
searching for asteroids. There's a very
nice picture of it over on the right
hand side there. Now, on the 31st of May
of that year, it passed really quite
close to the Earth, under 10 million
kilometers, 0.062
astronomical units, so 6% of the Earth's
sun distance. And then we lost it. and
losing asteroids and losing comets seems
to have been something that happened a
reasonable amount back in the day. Uh it
was much harder to track them when they
went away from the sun and the cometry
activity died down and then of course
they would get perturbed by interactions
with some of the major planets and come
back on a very slightly different orbit
not where everyone was expecting.
So, S SW3, well, it's quite a small
body, just 2.2 kilometers in diameter
for the nucleus, uh, 1.4 miles. That's
really typical of most small comets are
around about this sort of size. And it
orbits around the sun, but it was 40
years before it was rediscovered in
1979.
And it's another of these Jupiter family
comets. So it passes in past Mars, past
the Earth's orbit intersecting with that
and then swings back out to uh
approximately Jupiter's orbit and is
controlled in its orbital behavior by
the gravity of that giant planet taking
just 5.4 years to go around.
The last time it came close to the sun
was on the 25th of August 2022.
So fairly recently when it was just
about one astronomical unit from the sun
and about one astronomical unit away
from the earth and it will come back
again
next year or the year after sorry 23rd
of December 2027
that's two years from now as I make the
video on the far side of the sun. So two
AU from Earth, one AU the Earth's sun
distance from the Earth to the Sun and
another one to get to the other side of
Earth's orbit where the comet will be.
So its close approach will be behind the
sun.
But in 2025, earlier this year on the
3rd of April, it made a close pass of
Jupiter just 0.3 astronomical units
away.
And somewhere along the line, detected
in 1995,
it started to break up. And this is a
fantastic photograph here from the
Spitzer Space Telescope of the uh comet
breaking up and turning into a whole lot
of little comets, comets strung out like
beads along a wire, each with their own
tail.
It's was the sun's heat causing the
materials to sublime outwards, create
those cometry jets, and that seems to
have disrupted the body of the object
and formed originally four main visible
parts. But now with close study, we've
tracked 66 fragments that are all in
slightly different orbits. And each of
those has uh formed from the four
original ones themselves breaking up.
They're all moving at different speeds.
And there's this animation of this cloud
of cometlets that are now following the
main body. You can see the main chunk at
the front there. and all these smaller
little cometlets that's creating this
sort of shower of material all in almost
the same orbit but gradually drifting
apart from each other.
The largest remaining chunk is fragment
C of the uh four that were the original
chunks that came away. And there is a
lovely photograph there in black and
white of the fragment passing just north
of the ring nebula in the constellation
of Lyra there. And this is probably
essentially the original main nucleus.
The other pieces were smaller. This is
about a kilometer in diameter. [snorts]
And it's been possible for many amateur
astronomers to track down the fragments.
This makes quite an interesting little
challenge. You can locate where Swashman
Wackman 3, comet 73P, is on various star
maps. Um, it's in an orbit that doesn't
follow the a plane of the ecliptic, so
it can be sort of all over the sky
really. Um, and you can see there's a
little map there of it traversing up
into the constellation of uh, Signis and
as I sort of showed you earlier passing
the ring nebula in uh, the constellation
of Lyra. Um, and the picture on the
right is the B and C fragments both in
the same frame. I think that makes a
really, really nice image.
Now, it was planned to send the contour
mission to go and visit this and the
objective was to reach it in June, June
the 18th, 2006.
But unfortunately,
we lost contact with the probe on the
15th of August 2002. And that was when
it lit its engines to try to enter the
solar orbit and progress on a trajectory
that would have intercepted uh the
comet.
We think that it was uh the lighting of
the engines caused an explosion and
destroyed the spacecraft um or at least
put it out of action. It's a shame
because this mission was going to not
only visit Schwashman Wackman 3, it was
going to go to comet Enki. It was going
to go to comet Darest and possibly more
if further suitable targets could be
located. U but sadly we lost the lost
the mission. So um it's uh it wasn't
going to happen anyway.
And possibly because of this breaking up
behavior in 1995,
it has created its own meteor shower,
the tower Hercuids, which seemed to
emanate from a radiant up there
somewhere north of Hercules, possibly
even in the constellation of Bhutes.
Really, I I don't understand. And I
think there's already a bout uh boutids
um meteor shower. So this is the tow
hcuids. Um and the uh 1995 breakup is
expected to generate many more meteors.
Um particularly they were found on the
31st of May 2022. So, it's possible that
we'll see some more activity next time
the Earth goes through the trajectory,
the orbit of Swashman Wackman 3. So,
hope you've enjoyed that little tour of
a rather peculiar and misbehaving
cometry object. Thanks very much for
listening.